---
title: Docker make you life easier
author: Ryo Niwa
date: 2024-08-22
category: Packages
layout: post
---

Ref: https://www.docker.com/

> ##### Aim for this page
> Understand how to use docker
{: .block-tip }

Core RNA-Seq tools like DESeq2 and edgeR are implemented in R. As a result, many RNA-Seq web applications are primarily implemented in R as well. When creating web applications in R, developers often use a package called Shiny. However, one of the issues with these tools is that they can be somewhat slow in operation.

To address this, instead of accessing a web server to use RNA-Seq web applications, this post introduces a method to run these web applications on a local computer via Docker.

### Docker

Docker is a powerful platform designed to streamline the process of developing, shipping, and running applications by encapsulating them in lightweight, portable containers. These containers are essentially standalone, executable packages that include everything needed to run the application: code, runtime, system tools, libraries, and settings. Docker utilizes containerization technology to create isolated environments that can run consistently across various computing infrastructures, from a developer's local machine to test environments and production servers. This isolation ensures that the application works uniformly regardless of the host environment, effectively addressing the common "it works on my machine" problem.

Long story in short, if I make a docker image on my computer and share it with you, you can copy identical environment what I have in your computer. 

### Docker Desktop

Docker Desktop is a software application designed to manage Docker containers through a user-friendly graphical interface. It provides an accessible way for developers and researchers to interact with Docker, especially on personal computers. By default, when Docker Desktop is launched, it reserves 2 CPU cores and 8GB of RAM exclusively for Docker operations. This ensures that Docker containers have dedicated resources to run efficiently. 

Download and try the app from here:
https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/

Then copy and paste this command:

```bash=
docker run -d -p 80:80 docker/getting-started
```

After executing the command, docker automatically downloads required image.

Go to [localhost:80](docker run -d -p 80:80 docker/getting-started).

Now you copied an environment from docker labs and can see a website running locally (which means you are browsing the files in your computer). You can disconnect your WiFi and see whether the website lasts if you do not trust me. Many websites use docker as a base and put the container on servers like AWS. That's how website and web applications work. 

### Docker Hub

To execute the same process for RNA-Seq web application, docker images need to be uploaded somewhere or you have to make them by your own. Making docker images on your own takes a bit of studies and I do not introduce the methods in this post. Instead you can focus on tools that developers made images open. 

The *somewhere* developers upload their image is called docker hub (https://hub.docker.com/). Let's try iDEP, one of the most conventional RNA-Seq analysis webtools. 

```bash=
docker run --pull always -d --name idep -p 3838:3838 gexijin/idep:latest 
```

> Note that the Docker engine is now running in the backgroup, acting as a webserver. It works even if you restart your computer. To stop it, run these from Windows PowerShell:
This also works for macOS terminal.

```bash=
docker stop idep 
docker rm idep
```

As a repeat, docker steals your computer resource automatically. You have to shut the containers or app down. You can press Quit Docker Desktop without typing commands to stop docker. 

### Error occured?

Below is a typical error beginners encounter. This is because Docker system does not wake up on your computer. Click your app icon and wake it up!

```bash=
docker run -d -p 80:80 docker/getting-started

docker: Cannot connect to the Docker daemon at unix:///var/run/docker.sock. Is the docker daemon running?.
See 'docker run --help'.
```